Regie Cabico: Test mic. Hey everybody, please put your hands together, welcome to On the Move! [[applause]]
When I say 'poetry' you say 'rocks'.
Poetry
Audience: rocks!
Regie Cabico: Poetry
Regie Cabico: When I say 'spoken' you say 'word'. Spoken
Audience: word
Regie Cabico: Spoken
Regie Cabico: When I say 'to be' you say 'heard'.
Regie Cabico: To be
Audience: heard
Regie Cabico: If this is your very first time at the Folklife Festival, make some noise! [[Audience cheers]]
Alright, first-timers, you're just in time 'cause this is our fifty-year anniversary. My name is Regie Cabico. I am the curator of this program called 'Capturing Fire'.
If you don't know what Capturing Fire is, it is an annual queer spoken-word slammin' summit that happens in Washington D.C., going into its eighth year.
We've had phenomenal poets. As part of On the Move you're going to be hearing stories, spoken word poetry by people of color, children of immigrants, trans and queer identified performers. So we invite you to listen to our stories.
The takeaway message of On the Move. Since the beginning American culture has been shaped by the movement of people to and within the United States.
Recent immigrants with those who preceded them by generations or by millennia have contributed to the vitality of this country.
An understanding of the resilience of heritage, the many shapes of community and identity, and the creative potential and tensions between past and future.
We have three phenomenal spoken-word poets whom you will be hearing from in the house. We have Gary Kay. [[applause]] We have Dia Bui [[applause]] and we have Jerrica Escoto. [[applause]]
So if there are any Filipino folks, make some noise, Filipinos! [[cheering and applause]] Alright, excellent. So I'm going to kick off this piece. This is dedicated to everyone who's had to check a box.
The government asks me to check one if I want money. I say, 'how could you ask me to be one race? I stand proudly before you, a fierce Filipino, who knows how to belt hard gospel songs played to African drums at a Catholic mass
And loving the music to suffering beats and lashes from men's eyes of the capital's streets. Southeast D.C. with its sleepy crime. My mother nursed patients from seven to nine.
Patients gray from the railroad riding past civil rights. I walked their tracks when I entertained them at the chapel and made their canes pillars of percussion to my heavy gospel. My comedy out loud laughing about our shared stolen experiences of the South.
Would it surprise you if I told you my blood was delivered from north? Or Portuguese vessels who gave me spiritual stones and the turn in my eyes? My father's name where they conquered the Pacific isles? My hair is black and thick as nagrito, growing abundant the Sampaguita
Flowers defying civilization like Pilapino pygmies that dance on the mountain. I could give you an epic about my ways of life or my look, and you want me to fill it in one square box?
How could you tell me to fill Gilgamesh with all of its waters in the one square box? From what shape or integer do you count existing identities? Grant loans for the mind or Crayola white censor sheets? There's no One Kind to fill for anyone.
You tell me who I am, what gets the most money, and I'll sing that song like a one-man caravan. I know arias from Naples, Tunis and Accra, lullabies from welfare, food stamps and nature.
And you want me to sing one song?
I have danced jigs with Jim Crow and shuffled my hips to the sound of guitar of Clapton and Hendrix; waltzed with dead lovers, skipped to bamboo sticks, balleted kabuki and mimed catacalli, arrivederci the rhumba and tapped Tin Pan Alley, and you want me to dance the Bhagavad Gita on a box too small for a Thumbelina thin diva
Speaker 1: I'll check "other."
(Crowd cheering and applause)
Speaker 1: Wow, it feels so good to say I'm Filipino and queer, right on the mall.
Speaker 1: Without any further ado, you will hear, in this order, in a round-robin style, spoken [[?]] poetry.
Speaker 1: You'll hear from Gary Kay, [[Dia Bouy?]] and [[Jericha Escodo?]]
Speaker 1: Without any further ado, let's give it up for Gary Kay!
(Crowd cheering and applause)
Speaker 2: Hello, Smithsonian Folk Live Festival! How you doin'?
Speaker 2: Do we have folks here who are not from the D.C. area?
Speaker 2: Welcome to folks who are not from the D.C. area!
Speaker 2: D.C. folks, can we give it up for our visitors, joining us in our community today.
Speaker 2: My name is Gary Kay and I would like to start with a poem called...
Speaker 2: "How to be a Model Minority"
Speaker 2: They say be still. Be small.
Speaker 2: Stay seated. Stop squirming.
Speaker 2: This may be your life but they'll say what it's made of.
Speaker 2: They say a little sweetener on a spoon will make it smooth when the meds go down.
Speaker 2: They say they have the recipe to make you function.
Speaker 2: To pop. Pop. Snap till you crackle.
Speaker 2: They say poetry is dead or should be cuz words are useless.
Speaker 2: Just whining and rhyming. Hypnotizing. Justifying. Proselytizing.
Speaker 2: They don't see the uprising. But why would they?
Speaker 2: They say dissent is a sign that something bad is up your sleeve,
Speaker 2: when bent kneed, cuffed and pleading, you dare to ask why?
Speaker 2: They say you belong with a "he" and you with a "she."
Speaker 2: And who makes the rules? We!
Speaker 2: Because, they say, you don't know what's good for you.
Speaker 2: They say, you're the different. The misstep. The wrong color of the rainbow.
Speaker 2: They say they don't know where you belong but it's not here.
Speaker 2: 'Cuz this is their story and you weren't there. Not even a footnote.
Speaker 2: Defeated, deleted and then, not even indexed.
Speaker 2: They say your name never came up.
Speaker 2: To be a model minority, just keep your mouth...
Speaker 2: shut!
Speaker 2: Or open it and together, we will lift ourselves up.
[[applause]]
Dia Bui: Alright, it's a blessing to be here, thank you so much.
As I'm giving appreciation for being here, I'm going to lower this mics.
OK, that's all it goes-that's all-that's all-ba-all it does. Once again, my name is Dia Bui
uh, really proud to be here, queer and Vietnamese. So, the f- Yes, queer and Vietnamese.
So, I want to thank Regie for bringing us out here, Capturing Fire. Such a blessing to share the stage with the folks that you'll be hearing from.
So, the first poem I want to share with you is about love.
Can we all agree that we are constantly on the move and at the center of that is love? So, here is poem about love.
I call you love
not because I don't appreciate your given name
but when cynicism has us believing that love is fleeting
at least I know love has your permanent address.
in a world where love has become a word we use too readily at the end of letters
you learned to not let yourself be sealed in complacency like stone walls
echoing queer culture displaced in a generation and breaking bones and sounds were the only ways that we could tear ourselves out of the restraints of a straight jacket so we learn from history
build no emotional walls
because there are too many and too high in Gaza
Where former neighbors gaze into brute barriers to remember every hello before the concrete goodbye
and must look upwards towards heaven in hopes that their prayers are still friends on the other side
because spiritually, love knows no boundaries.
Unlike the heavily guarded borders under the- edging the ends of Mexico to the beginnings of San Diego
where families desperate to cross to get to their borders in hopes of their dreams
will only meet at the ends of Minute Men and the sharpshooters
and there I know
love.
So, I'll take a minute then to think before I ever use my sharp tongue against you
because when I first met you, I was desperately crossing to get to my
Dia Bui: And when we find love,
make no mistake that the edges of these fingertips
will memorize every natural curve and every climb out of the reasons
so when I write love poems,
even the ink can understand you between the sheets.
I call you "love," not because it's the sweetest thing to call you
but if I could write your name across the sky
even rainbows will know how to fall in love with you without clouded judgment.
They will understand that when the seasons change
you are as constant as streams of consciousness.
So, as we turn on the news, history will continue to repeat itself
so there's nothing new about broken heart, shattered dreams, and the ongoing violence
so maybe if we just sew our voices together
create our freedom quilts to wrap our struggles to keep them warm at night and in the morning,
you can whisper into my ears.
Create-
Strum your vocal cords like violins,
encrust the eardrums of the ongoing violence because your love,
like music, can even teach enemies to sound like friends.
Thank you.
[[applause]]
Jerrica Escoto: What's going on, Folk Life? How are you all?
Good, good.
My name is Jericha Scodo.
I am Filipino. Trans. Queer.
And I just moved here from San Diego. So, I'm very proud to be here, on the National Mall.
The night I came out to my Filipino father,
it was the same night I prepared myself to no longer be somebody's child.
My father's silence resembled the way the earth sounds when we are already six feet underground.
And for a split second, dying,
seemed a lot better than facing a man who has built my whole life with his two hands,
and telling him, I am nothing of what he expected me to be.
When I told my mother that I was in love with a woman,
she wept on our kitchen table and said, it wasn't normal.
Normal. I asked her, what does it even mean to actually be normal?
In elementary, it was normal for parents to pack their kids peanut butter and jelly sandwiches
and I was the abnormal kid who had to sit outside by themselves
because I was the weirdo with the peanut allergy.
And the first time, I made out with my boyfriend in the 7th grade,
I called him the next day and told him I didn't want to do it again because
I kinda felt like a ho. And he broke up with me.
He got with a girl, the next day, that didn't mind him sucking her face.
I found out. I went to the park where he played basketball with his friends.
I stopped the game, smacked him in front of his boys and I called him an asshole.
Later, I was told by teachers that behavior for girls actually isn't -- normal.
I figured out, at an early age, doing things normally isn't as fun as breaking all the rules.
And these days, there are a lot of things that just shouldn't be normal.
Like, it shouldn't be normal for you to shove someone deep into a closet
and expect them to learn how to love themselves with the lights off.
It shouldn't be normal for someone to have to choose
between who they want to spend the rest of their life with
and keeping their family for the rest of their life.
Bullying shouldn't be normal.
Hate crimes shouldn't be normal.
Waiting for the Supreme Court to decide whether or not, I can marry the only woman on this planet
who has ever put my nerves in suspension, shouldn't be normal.
What, especially, shouldn't be normal,
is that prickly, cacti shit, that grows on the outside of potatoes
when they have sat in your kitchen for too long,
It's weird. It's creepy and it makes me feel highly uncomfortable.
But people like you, people like you say it is natural. And normal.
Personally, keeping something in my kitchen that looks like
a venereal disease isn't really my thing, but --
I'm not one to be a potato-ist either.
So I don't touch it. I turn my head, and I walk away
because what a potato becomes, isn't really my business anyway.
So, if holding my wife's hand makes you feel weird, creeped out or highly uncomfortable,
don't touch us, turn your head and walk away.
Because what I do in my bedroom isn't really your business anyway.
I vow never to love my wife normally.
She will never feel like a habit or a routine.
I will always touch her with desperate hands,
when I say "I love you," it will never sound synonymous to "goodbye."
She will never blend with any of my other thoughts or memories.
She will stand out because it is too much to not choose a love that is extraordinary.
It is too much to not say "I do" and actually mean "I do."
Some say, coming out of the closet is a much too scary task.
I say, it is much more frightening living my life in darkness.
Speaker 1: Speaking of on the move I didn't mention where my family moved here from, my parents and my big brother moved to the United States from the country of Sri Lanka.
Speaker 1: Have people heard of Sri Lanka? Ok, it's always a mixed bag when I ask that question in groups of people.
Speaker 1: My people are Tamil. Uh, we've lived in this country my family's lived in this country for decades now, a lot of Tamil people left Sri Lanka in the 80s, 90s, early 2000s due to the war that was going on there.
Speaker 1: This is a poem that I wrote last year talking about some of the history and some of the current issues going on there.
Speaker 1: Uh, it's called how to enjoy your vacation to a country that says it won the war.
Speaker 1: While planning your journey, accept that ethics are not included in the price of your ticket.
Speaker 1: Tell yourself your currency is helping the country.
Speaker 1: Do not question government control of the tourism industry.
Speaker 1: When researching your destination, skip the sections on families in camps.
Speaker 1: Book a tour, even if the army will not give them back their land.
Speaker 1: Never ask why killing fields have been converted into resorts run by the military.
Speaker 1: Learn the dominant language, which translates 'war criminals' into 'heroes'.
Speaker 1: Make eye contact with soldiers and police in the northeast.
Speaker 1: Inhale island steam from export quality tea. Exhale, torture, sexual violence, and surveillance as ongoing strategies.
Speaker 1: Speak freely in public in your accent of opportunity. When talking about 'the people‘, identify them all as 'Sri Lankans'.
Speaker 1: Do not stare too long at the survivors of genocide. Do not use that word at all.
Speaker 1: Gaze into the sea that greets occupied Tamil homeland, and name it paradise.
Speaker 1: Collect souvenirs celebrating elephants, so your friends envision beauty, not mass atrocities.
Speaker 1: Define 'tourist' as 'none of this involves me'. Take photos of every sunset.
Speaker 1: Always have your passport handy. Keep your conscience secure, in the hotel, safe.
Dia Bui: I'm gonna ask if we can give Gary another praise around and keep that energy up. Whoo! [[Applause]]
Dia Bui: Uh, [[Applause]] So, on the move and you're here on the national mall and I recognize that it's a bit warm and we're outdoors
Dia Bui: and you probably had heard a slew of different topics
Dia Bui: and you're hitting this one and it sounds like 'How does it make sense?'
Dia Bui: So, I wanna share with you all in terms of my queerness and my journey in being queer
Dia Bui: It has everything to do with being on the move.
Dia Bui: It has everything to do with having to survive,
Dia Bui: or making decisions that require you to move one place to the other
Dia Bui: when sometimes home feels so far away,
Dia Bui: or when it is the closest, it still doesn't feel like home,
Dia Bui: because home is constantly a wonder of if is there safety?
Dia Bui: Is there acceptance? Is there tolerance? Is there a way for anyone to embrace me?
Dia Bui: and is in a way to love
Dia Bui: And so, opening up with love, I want to share with you something that really made me think more deeply today.
Dia Bui: Some of y'all might have heard this event happening, which is that Jay-Z dropped a new album.
Dia Bui: Y'all heard that? yes, you did, yes. I'm gonna bring it up, yes.
Dia Bui: Real quickly, I just wanna share that on one of his tracks, he featured his mother on the track
Dia Bui: And I want to share this with you before I op--uh-- before I do my second poem,
Dia Bui: which is called 'Survival', and so, in this song,
Dia Bui: that they had collaborated together.
Dia Bui: it was admission of her sexuality, of her queerness
Dia Bui: his line goes 'Momma had four kids but she's a lesbian,
Dia Bui: had to pretend so long that she's a thespian
Dia Bui: had to hide in the closet so she medicate
Dia Bui: society shame and the pain was too much to take
Dia Bui: cried tears of joy when you fell in love
Dia Bui: don't matter to me if it's him or her'
Dia Bui: and in the track, this is her poem
Dia Bui: 'Living in the shadow can you imagine what kind of life it is to live
Dia Bui: in the shadows, people see you as happy and free bu-because that's what you want them to see.
Dia Bui: The world is changing and they say it's time to be free
Dia Bui: but you live with fear of just being me
Dia Bui: living in the shadow feels like a safe place to be
Dia Bui: no harm for them, no harm for me
Dia Bui: but life is short, and it's time to be free
Dia Bui: love who you love because life isn't guaranteed'
Dia Bui: so in this next poem, I'd like to share with you
Dia Bui: is about my experience living in DC as a queer woman of colour,
Dia Bui: and trying to survive every day as a queer woman of colour walking these streets.
Dia Bui: On some days, I love to meet new people in random places
in this city, walking can be a mode of communication
but for a queer woman of color, every step is like morse code
anything can be seen as sending signals
there are just some places my body prefers to keep quiet
prefers to look ahead, prefers that no one looks, speaks, or even breathe
at me, my head sideways, tilted at a slight angle because
most days, walking queer can mean violence
it means that at any given moment, any given space
cis men of all shapes and sizes will come at me
and my girlfriend sideways and at all directions
they'll catcall my partner before ever knowing her first name
and when she speaks up for herself
call these men out on unwanted remarks as their tongue coils
like the barrel of a gun, they'll fire rounds of their insecurity
like 'Damn it's a compliment. You can't take a compliment?'
and continue to berate her for talking back
it's triggering, it's psychological, emotional, and even physical
warfare, like when a white man in khaki shorts and boat shoes
on U street dares to stick a piece of paper in my partner's top
and says 'it's just flirting' my fist curls up
I feel a burning anger like the only resolution is to fight
violence with violence. my body can't contain itself
from being harassed, then witnessing assault of any kind
I know, I know
I should be giving him bell hooks instead of my left ones
but not even [[Applause]] Thank you
because most days, we are violated on the streets
Not even sidewalks are wide enough for safe spaces
No prayer that I can stomach to keep her safe from the onslaught of gaze
the straight whistles flying freely from misogynistic
lips, and the hissing threats of rape or sounds that send chills down my spine
and I constantly agonize, over not having more of a backbone
to withstand the heaviness of this violence
So, I wait to get home
I hurry into the bed that we share, hold her under the covers
I tell her 'I love you' as prayers still lift us into sunrises
it's the only way I know how to keep carrying ourselves
through the violence, that while the mainstream rejoices over sex-same marriages
Speaker 1: Same-sex marriages, all we are really trying to do is survive walks around our neighborhoods
[[Cheering]]
Speaker 2: Hello
[SILENCE]
Speaker 2: So I have a series of poetry entitled 'My American Father'.
Speaker 2: There's three parts to it I'm going to do the first part here.
Speaker 2: And I always write a new part when I'm in a different part in my life, in my relationship with my father has evolved
Speaker 2: So, this first part I wrote in 2009
Speaker 2: And it was still when I was still trying to figure out the language of what this tension was between me and my father.
Speaker 2: And I have a women's studies degree, a BA and a Masters
Speaker 2: And so women's studies really helped me to formulate the language
Speaker 2: In order for me to start healing
Speaker 2: and kind of reassemble this relationship with my father.
[SILENCE]
Speaker 2: I've swallowed so much pride that the confines of my stomach
Speaker 2: only grumble wasted dignity and the word 'daddy'
Speaker 2: in between desperate attempts of regurgitation.
Speaker 2: This poem stands juxtaposed with my critical tears.
Speaker 2: An [[??]] critical condition,
Speaker 2: too critical for movement except for when immigrated fathers don't feel good enough for Americanized children
Speaker 2: and when Americanized children don't feel food enough for immigrated fathers.
Speaker 2: And I wonder, daddy, if someone would of told you it was gonna be this hard, would you of stayed?
Speaker 2: Because you've aged drastically,
Speaker 2: and the permament creases on your forehead only show timelines of your struggle
Speaker 2: you work your ass to own up to an American dollar but you've been slipping,
Speaker 2: as each dollar went to us first, first-place should always feel rewarding
Speaker 2: but as first generation children I would of took second, or third,
Speaker 2: or hell maybe even none at all and daddy,
Speaker 2: amongst America, branding inadequate confidence into your hard work you forgot to tell me you loved me first.
Speaker 2: Amongst American standards, stapling your immigrant lips shut with deferred dreams
Speaker 2: you forgot to teach me the tounges of our ancestors and I'm left exposed
Speaker 2: with red and white stripes down my wrist a blue heart
Speaker 2: and eyes, full of shooting star tears because my struggle, daddy,
Speaker 2: has nothing to do with my golden skin,
Speaker 2: has nothing to do with a third world bending their backs to reach first
Speaker 2: how could you tell me that I'm not so different from you when I was born birthmarked with privledge and you,
Speaker 2: born nothing but a brown man, born nothing but a yellow man
Speaker 2: but these days you turn nothing but all black a shadow, daddy,
Speaker 2: I would of stopped you if it meant you being an American first before my father.
Speaker 2: I would of never accepted the big houses and fancy cars if it meant you hiding behind them,
Speaker 2: if it meant living in the same house with just a floating body with no substance, daddy,
Speaker 2: you didn't have to throw your bottle of dreams into the ocean in hopes that it would float onto American soil.
Speaker 2: Because now, our conversations consist of me spitting standards onto your beliefs
Speaker 2: and piercing your intelligence with 'you don't understand' before I ever even gave you the chance to speak.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry I was the white man before your child.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry I was another staple on your lips in a conversation too heavy to speak
Speaker 2: I want to say more to you than just bullshit about student loans and Sunday afternoon football games
Speaker 2: I want to tell you about all the times my heart has been broken and how it could of been prevented
Speaker 2: if I had just stayed daddy's number one so daddy, I'm here to take back my title.
Speaker 2: I'm here to build love poems down your spine to help you stand taller as my father.
Speaker 2: I'm putting on my chinelas and racing accross country hitting every flagpole in this nation
Speaker 2: replacing the American flag with your picture lets show 'em daddy.
Speaker 2: Lets show 'em what its like to really dream.
Speaker 1: Have people heard of 'Found Poetry' before, or 'Found Poems?'
Speaker 1: So, Found Poems can come in very different shapes and sizes.
Speaker 1: One way to do found poems is just do something like pick up a book,
Speaker 1: that you have, or a newspaper and look through, and just
Speaker 1: take phrases or just sentences or just words that you wanna use
Speaker 1: and craft a poem out of that. You can also take entire pieces
Speaker 1: of text and play with them. and turn those into found poems
Speaker 1: So this is a found poem that I wrote
Speaker 1: or rather, found,
Speaker 1: On Earth Day this year, I was visiting family,
Speaker 1: and we were at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich, Connecticut,
Speaker 1: and I was reading an exhibit on sedimentary minerals
Speaker 1: and rocks. and learning lots of things. And I found myself reading one of the
Speaker 1: curator's signs explaining some of the principles of sedimentary minerals and rocks,
Speaker 1: and I thought, 'You know, I feel like this paragraph would work if I just pulled out one phrase
Speaker 1: and put another phrase in its place.
Speaker 1: so, what I've done here, is taken any instance of the phrase
Speaker 1: 'sedimentary minerals and rocks'
Speaker 1: And changed it to
Speaker 1: 'People of the Global Majority'
Speaker 1: which is another term for People of Color
Speaker 1: People of the Global Majority
Speaker 1: are extremely varied, differing wildly in texture, colour, and composition
Speaker 1: In total, these people cover about three-quarters of the Earth's surface
Speaker 1: Nearly all are made of materials that have been moved from a place of origin
Speaker 1: to a new place of deposition
Speaker 1: The distance moved maybe a few feet
Speaker 1: or thousands of miles
Speaker 1: Most People of the Global Majority form in layers --
Speaker 1: Or strata -- Many contain fossils
[[Applause]]
[SILENCE]
Speaker 2: I'm still lost, I don't have a found poem.
Speaker 2: I brought up a couple things before my last poem, uh, for today
Speaker 2: Uh, first of all, once again my name is  Día Bùi. I lived in DC for seven years, just moved to New York
Speaker 2: I joined an agency called the "The Soze Agency," one of our really proud accomplishments
Speaker 2: is partnering with four-dot-US to put out immigrant heritage month, and so if y'all didn't know, this is the last day
Speaker 2: of Immigrant Heritage Month, I'm wearing the shirt "I Stand with Immigrants".
Speaker 2: I have stickers to give out, I'm more than happy to share, I'm proud to do so
Speaker 2: I have stickers "I am an immigrant" "I stand with immigrants"
Speaker 2: and it's so appropriate for On the MOve, today at the National Mall.
Speaker 2: In Washington D.C. so please feel free to take some, love for you to share with your friends and families.
Speaker 2: You stand with immigrants, if you are an immigrant, we celebrate you
Speaker 2: Uh -- We are the fabric of this country among many, many groups and folks
Speaker 2: I see -- uh -- somebody walking with "I am an Immigrant" T-Shirt! Yee-ees!
Speaker 2: Alright, so, more than happy to do that. uh-- just want to give a shout-out to
Speaker 2: The Youth of Color, who come from immigrant families, who are here today
Speaker 2: that I had a blessing to work with -- Asian-American League, Young People if you can show yourselves, Let them know that you're here -ish
Speaker 2: Yes, I know, it's being forced [[Applause]]
Speaker 1: Um, I'm Vietnamese. My family comes from Vietnam.
They were part of the boat refugees who came to the US.
So when I think about migration, I think about how people move,
and the reasons for they move and a lot of them have to do with survival.
So my story is about survival and it continues to build-
It will be about survival and so this poem that I wrote more than two day-
Uh a decade ago when I started this journey in poetry is called "The Anthology."
And I'd love to close this out with this poem.
Uh and as I'm working on putting together a collection of poems this will be a part of it.
The Anthology is dedicated to the real life stories and struggles of the following Southeast Asian women,
I honor their strength, courage, and wisdom. They are [[?]] my mother who was a refugee from the Vietnam War,
Denise Alfonco, author of "To The End of Hell," one woman's struggle to survive the Cambodia Khmer Rouge,
and Lillian Alletle, the mother of the late Joseph Alletle who was killed in a hate crime in 1998.
I've been writing about the stories that matter to me the most.
Unlike fictional novels, these stories are undeniably profound,
and the English classes with the all American teachers
do not understand what it means to have an identity hyphenated, Vietnamese-American.
I've been writing about the issues that matter to me the most,
about the people who were still [[?]] for refuge but have never found it.
The war that gave birth to the refugees who sought for refugee but have never found it.
My homeland is still struggling for freedom and equality,
my country is still divided between simplicity and democracy.
The poor are on their hands and knees while conscious citizens are dying to speak.
Where are the human rights...
for the Vietnamese?
I've been writing about the struggles that matter to me the most like those that belonged to my mother who escaped Haiphong Vietnam in '81 and barely made it past the coast,
drifting solemnly at sea with no mother, with no father, with no brother, no sister.
She was holding on to the hands of strangers crowded on a small wooden boat and,
with no food and with no water and with no idea whether or not she would live or die and only...
by the grace of hope, she was able to survive.
I've been writing about her story as I wipe tears from my eyes, crying because I know the pain [[?]] will never die.
She gave birth to her first child just so hope would never die.
And in America she trusted, the America that gave her two shifts and two jobs instead of an opportunity for education,
her America told her, your opportunity is an assimilation, remember because this is your education
and for most of my life all she has ever known is [[?]]through her bare hands.
ON the day that I was born, she held me in her arms and whispered,
"You will not suffer as I have, you are an American.
[Speaks Vietnamese] [Translates]: I am Vietnamese-American."
So I've been listening to the voices in my surrounding communities,
from the, those who understand the fall, the murder the spirits of the free, like my [[?]] brothers and sisters carrying on the devastations of their mothers and fathers
from the same war that gave birth to ruthless leader. The Red Rouge with the red rifles with the red hands and the red butt stains on the killing fields and broken lands.
A wife can never forget the images of her husband being slaughtered, as much as she tries she can't.
And in her memories are images of her daughter dying from hunger. A mother can never forget. As much as she tries she can't.
So I've been learning from the elders who come before me seeking peace from the unanswered American dream
like the mother of a Filipino postal worker whose son was shot nine times in broad American daylight, so I ask why?
Why is a brother too Asian and not just American?
So now I've been speaking about the issues that matter to me the most.
In all struggles of life, we most remain strong so please remember these words deeper than your hearts:
Keep on fighting, do not be afraid, [repeats phrase in Vietnamese twice]. Right?
And speak about the stories that matter to you the most.
[[applause]]
[SILENCE]
Speaker 1: One more poem. Are y'all still good? Hydrated? Good.
Um. So, I was talking about the different parts...um...
The different parts of my life where I write poems to my father, um.
I actually will be back on the stage at 2:45 with Regie Cabico
uh, we're doing a conversation on what it is to be Filipino and queer and other poems, so
[clears throat] I will do the other poems there, but, uh, I wanted to do this poem because
particularly now in my life, uh, I just started identifying as being trans about a year ago
and, um, it's not something that I have come out and told my parents yet because
coming out as being gay was hard enough and that took about ten years of healing.
Um, so I'm going to do this poem now which is the first poem I've ever written
about identifying as being trans
Um, sort of... to my father hoping he hears me all the way in California.
[SILENCE]
Some nights,
I wake up choking to the woman inside of me trying to claw her way out of my mouth.
She waits until I am sleeping because it is the only time I do not try to forget her.
Sometimes, when I am alone, I can hear her weeping in between the times I inhale and exhale.
When I bind my chest, I feel more than just the suffocation of my body,
I feel hurt inside of me, gasping for air.
I know she is terrified I am trying to squeeze her out of me for good.
For a while, I tried. I swallowed her in front of other men to not seem weak.
I stiffened up every time I felt her welling up behind my eyes.
Used her as a scapegoat the times anger was the only prayer in my mouth.
Blamed her for the depression, the anxiety, the dysphoria,
the dirty looks in public restrooms and fitting rooms for being a goddamn box
To check on paperwork, I hated her for having the audacity to stay
even after I demanded her to leave.
I also mourned, and I grieved.
I didn't know how to say goodbye, I didn't know if I had to.
When my therapist told me I have internalized misogyny, I cried.
Until the woman in me finally poured out my eyes and onto the floor
She has never said I told you so, she has only ever offered me a book of poems
written by the person I used to be, and now, here, in front of this mirror that I
that I begged to tell me lies,
I am desperately looking for something that resembles something familiar
but I've only ever performed by poems in a higher pitch and I fear a lower frequency
will have me relearn what it means to be quiet when all I want to do is scream
I am here, this is me, but my refusal to remember her is also my refusal to become a man
who does not fall victim to fragile masculinity, to be a man
does not mean to forget all the parts of me that is woman, that is soft,
that is compassionate, that is the only version of myself that I have ever been damn proud of.
To become the day, that I can embrace my femininity, will be the day I have stepped
into my true masculinity.
I would be lying, if I said the noise of patriarchy does not keep me up at night sometimes
I let her out before I go to bed, we do not speak.
I do not remember the last time I looked her in the eye but she just lies
next to me, quiet, she puts her arms around me and reminds me I am not alone and
Sometimes, it is the only time I can be put to sleep.
Jerrica Escoto: To dismiss her, is to dismiss the fact that she is the reason why I am still alive.
Jerrica Escoto: I am nothing, without the parts of me I have been and will become.
Jerrica Escoto: I am nothing, without the woman who lives inside of me.
[crowd applause]
Regie Cabico: Let's give it up for Jerrica Escoto everybody!
Regie Cabico: Let's welcome back to the stage for a final Capturing Fire. Let's give it up for Gowri K, Dia Bui, and Jerrica Escoto.
Regie Cabico: Could I ask someone to snap a photo? Someone? Thank you so so much.
Regie Cabico: I'm Regie Cabico.
Regie Cabico: Yeah. You will see me perform with Jerrica. He and I will be performing at 2:45 right here.
Regie Cabico: um, and also group group photo
Regie Cabico: Thank you so much.
Regie Cabico: Big big shoutout to the Smithsonian Latino Center; Asian Pacific American Center; Triple-A, which is not what you think, The American Anthropological Association
Regie Cabico: with collaboration of Anacostia Community Museum; National Museum of American History; On the Move advisory committee; youth advisory council; the National Park Service; WAMU; United States Citizenship and Immigration Services; Poets and writers; and all of our ancestors.
Regie Cabico: um. Thank you so much. We will see you very very soon.
Regie Cabico: I need a drink. I'm single and available. So, if you have a brother, an uncle, a great-great-grandfather, or someone who has beer and/or ice cream. I also do shiatsu.
Regie Cabico: Thank you.
Regie Cabico: And big big shoutout to Jessie, our fabulous tech and Olivia Cadaval, and Sojin Kim, and Amalia, and all the folks at Folk Life. Thank you.
[crowd applause]